From all available evidence no black man had ever set foot in this tiny Swiss village before I
came. I was told before arriving that I would probably be a "sight" for the village; I took this to mean that
people of my complexion were rarely seen in Switzerland, and also that city people are always something
of a "sight" outside of the city. It did not occur to me-possibly because I am an American-that there could
be people anywhere who had never seen a Negro.
It is a fact that cannot be explained on the basis of the inaccessibility of the village. The village is
very high, but it is only four hours from Milan and three hours from Lausanne. It is true that it is virtually
unknown. Few people making plans for a holiday would elect to come here. On the other hand, the
villagers are able, presumably, to come and go as they please - which they do: to another town at the foot
of the mountain, with a population of approximately five thousand, the nearest place to see a movie or go
to the bank. In the village there is no movie house, no bank, no library, no theater; very few radios, one
jeep, one station wagon; and at the moment, one typewriter, mine, an invention which the woman next
door to me here had never seen. There are about six hundred people living here, all Catholic- I conclude
this from the fact that the Catholic church is open all year round, whereas the Protestant chapel, set off on
a hill a little removed from the village, is open only in the summertime when the tourists arrive. There are
four or five hotels, all closed now, and four or five bistros, of which, however, only two do any business
during the winter. These two do not do a great deal, for life in the village seems to end around nine or ten
o'clock. There are a few stores, butcher, baker, epicerie, a hardware store, and a money-changer-who
cannot change travelers' checks, but must send them down to the bank, an operation which takes two or
three days. There is something called the Ballet Haus, closed in the winter and used for God knows what,
certainly not ballet, during the summer. There seems to be only one schoolhouse in the village, and this
for the quite young children; I suppose this to mean that their older brothers and sisters at some point
descend from these mountains in order to complete their education-possibly, again, to the town just
below. The landscape is absolutely forbidding, mountains towering on all four sides, ice and snow as far
as the eye can reach. In this white wilderness, men and women and children move all day, carrying
washing, wood, buckets of milk or water, sometimes skiing on Sunday afternoons. All week long boys
and young men are to be seen shoveling snow off the rooftops, or dragging wood down from the forest in
sleds.
The village's only real attraction, which explains the tourist season, is the hot spring water. A
disquietingly high proportion of these tourists are cripples, or semi- cripples, who come year after year-
from other parts of Switzerland, usually-to take the waters. This lends the village, at the height of the
season, a rather terrifying air of sanctity, as though it were a lesser Lourdes. There is often something
beautiful, there is always something awful, in the spectacle of a person who has lost one of his faculties, a
faculty he never questioned until it was gone, and who struggles to recover it. Yet people remain people,
on crutches or indeed on deathbeds; and wherever I passed, the first summer I was here, among the native
villagers or among the lame, a wind passed with me-of astonishment, curiosity, amusement and outrage.
That first summer I stayed two weeks and never intended to return. But I did return in the winter, to work;
the village offers, obviously, no distractions whatever and has the further advantage of being extremely
cheap. Now it is winter again, a year later, and I am here again. Everyone in the village knows my name,
though they scarcely ever use it, knows that I come from America though, this, apparently, they will
never really believe: black men come from Africa-and everyone knows that I am the friend of the son of a
woman who was born here, and that I am staying in their chalet. But I remain as much a stranger today as
I was the first day I arrived, and the children shout Neger! Neger! as I walk along the streets.
It must be admitted that in the beginning I was far too shocked to have any real reaction. In so far
as I reacted at all, I reacted by trying to be pleasant-it being a great part of the American Negro's
education (long before he goes to school) that he must make people like him. This smile-and-the world-
smiles-with-you routine worked about as well in this situation as it had in the situation for which it was
designed, which is to of phenomenon which allowed them to see my teeth-they did not, really, see my
smile and I began to think that, should I take to snarling, no one would notice any difference. All of the
physical characteristics of the Negro which had caused me, in America, a very different and almost
forgotten pain were nothing less than miraculous-or infernal-in the eyes of the village people. Some
thought my hair was the color of tar, that it had the texture of wire, or the texture of cotton. It was
jocularly suggested that I might let it all grow long and make myself a winter coat. If I sat in the sun for
more than five minutes some daring creature was certain to come along and gingerly put his fingers on
my hair, as though he were afraid of an electric shock, or put his hand on my hand, astonished that the
color did not rub off. In all of this, in which it must be conceded there was the charm of genuine wonder
and in which there were certainly no element of intentional unkindness, there was yet no suggestion that I
was human: I was simply a living wonder.
I knew that they did not mean to be unkind, and I know it now; it is necessary, nevertheless, for
me to repeat this to myself each time that I walk out of the chalet. The children who shout Neger! have no
way of knowing the echoes this sound raises in me. They are brimming with good humor and the more
daring swell with pride when I stop to speak with them. Just the same, there are days when I cannot pause
and smile, when I have no heart to play with them; when, indeed, I mutter sourly to myself, exactly as I
muttered on the streets of a city these children have never seen, when I was no bigger than these children
are now: Your mother was a nigger. Joyce is right about history being a nightmare-but it may be the
nightmare from which no one can awaken. People are trapped in history and history is trapped in them.
There is a custom in the village- I am told it is repeated in many villages- of buying African
natives for the purpose of converting them to Christianity. There stands in the church all year round a
small box with a slot for money, decorated with a black figurine, and into this box the villagers drop their
francs. During the carnival which precedes Lent, two village children have their faces blackened-out of
which bloodless darkness their blue eyes shine like ice-and fantastic horsehair wigs are placed on their
blond heads; thus disguised, they solicit among the villagers for money for the missionaries in Africa.
Between the box in the church and blackened children, the IJ village "bought" last year six or eight
African natives. This was reported to me with pride by the wife of one of the bistro owners and I was
careful to express astonishment and pleasure at the solicitude shown by the village for the souls of black
folks. The bistro owner's wife beamed with a pleasure far more genuine than my own and seemed to feel
that I might now breathe more easily concerning the souls of at least six of my kinsmen.
I tried not to think of these so lately baptized kinsmen, of the price paid for them, or the peculiar
price they themselves would pay, and said nothing about my father, who having taken his own conversion
too literally never, at bottom, forgave the white world (which he described as heathen) for having saddled
him with a Christ in whom, to judge at least from their treatment of him, they themselves no longer
believed. I thought of white men arriving for the first time in an African village, strangers there, as I am a
stranger here, and tried to imagine the astounded populace touching their hair and marveling at the color
of their skin. But there is a great difference between being the first white man to be seen by Africans and
being the first black man to be seen by whites. The white man takes the astonishment as tribute, for he
arrives to conquer and to convert the natives, whose inferiority in relation to himself is not even to be
questioned; whereas I, without a thought of conquest, find myself among a people whose culture controls
me, has even, in a sense, created me, people who have cost me more in anguish and rage than they will
ever know, who yet do not even know of my existence. The astonishment, with which I might have
greeted them, should they have stumbled into my African village a few hundred years ago, might have
rejoiced their hearts. But the astonishment with which they greet me today can only poison mine.
And this is so despite everything I may do to feel differently, despite my friendly conversations
with the bistro owner's wife, despite their three-year-old son who has at last become my friend, despite
the saluts and bonsoirs which I exchange with people as I walk, despite the fact that I know that no
individual can be taken to task for what history is doing, or has done. I say that the culture of these people
controls me-but they can scarcely be held responsible for European culture. America comes out of
Europe, but these people have never seen America, nor have most of them seen more of Europe than the
hamlet at the foot of their mountain. Yet they move with an authority which I shall never have; and they
regard me, quite rightly, not only as a stranger in the village but as a suspect latecomer, bearing no
credentials, to everything they have-however unconsciously-inherited.
For this village, even were it incomparably more remote and incredibly more primitive, is the
West, the West onto which I have been so strangely grafted. These people cannot be, from the point of
view of power, strangers anywhere in the world; they have made the modem world, in effect, even if they
do not know it. The most illiterate among them is related, in away that I am not, to Dante, Shakespeare,
Michelangelo, Aeschylus, Da Vinci, Rembrandt, and Racine; the cathedral at Chartres says something to
them which it cannot say to me, as indeed would New York's Empire State Building, should anyone here
ever see it. Out of their hymns and dances come Beethoven and Bach. Go back a few centuries and they
are in their full glory-but I am in Africa, watching the conquerors arrive.
The rage of the disesteemed is personally fruitless, but it is also absolutely inevitable: the rage, so
generally discounted, so little understood even among the people whose daily bread it is, is one of the
things that makes history. Rage can only with difficulty, and never entirely, be brought under the
domination of the intelligence and is therefore not susceptible to any arguments whatever. This is a fact
which ordinary representatives of the Herrenvolk, having never felt this rage and being unable to imagine,
quite fail to understand. Also, rage cannot be hidden, it can only be dissembled. This dissembling deludes
the thoughtless, and strengthens rage and adds, to rage, contempt. There are, no doubt, as many ways of
coping with the resulting complex of tensions as there are black men in the world, but no black man can
hope ever to be entirely liberated from this internal warfare-rage, dissembling, and contempt having
inevitably accompanied his first realization of the power of white men. What is crucial here is that since
white men represent in the black man's world so heavy a weight, white men have for black men a reality
which is far from being reciprocal; and hence all black men have toward all white men an attitude which
is designed, really, either to rob the white man of the jewel of his naiveté, or else to make it cost him
dear.
The black man insists, by whatever means he finds at his disposal, that the white man cease to
regard him as an exotic rarity and recognize him as a human being. This is a very charged and difficult
moment, for there is a great deal of will power involved in the white man's naiveté. Most people are not
naturally reflective any more than they are naturally malicious, and the white man prefers to keep the
black man at a certain human remove because it is easier for him thus to preserve his simplicity and avoid
being called to account for crimes committed by his forefathers, or his neighbors. He is inescapably
aware, nevertheless, that he is in a better position in the world than black men are, nor can he quite put to
death the suspicion that he is hated by black men therefore. He does not wish to be hated, neither does he
wish to change places, and at this point in his uneasiness he can scarcely avoid having recourse to those
legends which white men have created about black men, the most usual effect of which is that the white
man finds himself enmeshed, so to speak, in his own language which describes hell, as well as the
attributes which lead one to hell, as being as black as night.
Every legend, moreover, contains its residuum of truth, and the root function of language is to
control the universe by describing it. It is of quite considerable significance that black men remain, in the
imagination, and in overwhelming numbers in fact, beyond the disciplines of salvation; and this despite
the fact that the West has been "buying" African natives for centuries. There is, I should hazard, an
instantaneous necessity to be divorced from this so visibly unsaved stranger, in whose heart, moreover ,
one cannot guess what dreams of vengeance are being nourished; and, at the same time, there are few
things on earth more attractive than the idea of the unspeakable liberty which is allowed the unredeemed.
When, beneath the black mask, a human being begins to make himself felt one cannot escape a certain
awful wonder as to what kind of human being it is. What one's imagination makes of other people is
dictated, of course, by the Master race laws of one's own personality and it’s one of the ironies of black-
white relations that, by means of what the white man imagines the black man to be, the black man is
enabled to know who the white man is.
I have said, for example, that I am as much a stranger in this village today as I was the first
summer I arrived, but this is not quite true. The villagers wonder less about the texture of my hair than
they did then, and wonder rather more about me. And the fact that their wonder now exists on another
level is reflected in their attitudes and in their eyes. There are the children who make those delightful,
hilarious, sometimes astonishingly grave overtures of friendship in the unpredictable fashion of children;
other children, having been taught that the devil is a black man, scream in genuine anguish as I approach.
Some of the older women never pass without a friendly greeting, never pass, indeed, if it seems that they
will be able to engage me in conversation; other women look down or look away or rather
contemptuously smirk. Some of the men drink with me and suggest that I learn how to ski-partly, I gather,
because they cannot imagine what I would look like on skis-and want to know if I am married, and ask
questions about my metier. But some of the men have accused le sale negre-behind my back-of stealing
wood and there is already in the eyes of some of them that peculiar, intent, paranoiac malevolence which
one sometimes surprises in the eyes of American white men when, out walking with their Sunday girl,
they see a Negro male approach.
There is a dreadful abyss between the streets of this village and the streets of the city in which I
was born, between the children who shout Neger! today and those who shouted Nigger! yesterday-the
abyss is experience, the American experience. The syllable hurled behind me today expresses, above all,
wonder: I am a stranger here. But, I am not a stranger in America and the same syllable riding on the
American air expresses the war my presence has occasioned in the American soul.
For this village brings home to me this fact: that there was a day, and not really a very distant day,
when Americans were scarcely Americans at all but discontented Europeans, facing a great unconquered
continent and strolling, say, into a marketplace and seeing black men for the first time. The shock this
spectacle afforded is suggested, surely, by the promptness with which they decided that these black men
were not really men but cattle. It is true that the necessity on the part of the settlers of the New World of
reconciling their moral assumptions with the fact -and the necessity-of slavery enhanced immensely the
charm of this idea, and it is also true that this idea expresses, with a truly American bluntness, the attitude
which to varying extents all masters have had toward all slaves.
But between all former slaves and slave-owners and the drama which begins for Americans over
three hundred years ago at Jamestown, there are at least two differences to be observed. The American
Negro slave could not suppose, for one thing, as slaves in past epochs had supposed and often done, that
he would ever be able to wrest the power from his master's hands. This was a supposition which the
modern era, which was to bring about such vast changes in the aims and dimensions of power, put to
death; it only begins in unprecedented fashion, and with dreadful implications, to be resurrected, today.
But even had this supposition persisted with undiminished force, the American Negro slave could not
have used it to lend his condition dignity, for the reason that this J supposition rests on another: that the
slave in exile yet remains related to his past, has some means-if only in memory-of revering and
sustaining the forms of his former life, is able, in short, to maintain his identity.
This was not the case with the American Negro slave. He is unique among the black men of the
world in that his past was taken from him, almost literally, at one blow. One wonders what on earth the
first slave found to say to the first dark child he bore. I am told that there are Haitians able to trace their
ancestry back to African kings, but any American Negro wishing to go back so far will find his journey
through time abruptly arrested by the signature on the bill of sale which served as the entrance paper for
his ancestor. At the time-to say nothing of the circumstances-of the enslavement of the captive black man
who was to become the American Negro, there was not the remotest possibility that he would ever take
power from his master's hands. There was no reason to suppose that his situation would ever change, nor
was there, shortly, anything to indicate that his situation had ever been different. It was his necessity, in
the words of E. Franklin Frazier, to find a "motive for living under American culture or die." The identity
of the American Negro comes out of this extreme situation, and the evolution of this identity was a source
of the most intolerable anxiety in the minds and the lives of his masters.
For the history of the American Negro is unique also in this: that the question of his humanity,
and of his rights therefore as a human being, became a burning one for several generations of Americans,
so burning a question that it ultimately became one of those used to divide the nation. It is out of this
argument that the venom of the epithet: Nigger! is derived. It is an argument which Europe has never had,
and hence Europe: quite sincerely fails to understand how or why the argument arose in the first place,
why its effects are frequently disastrous and always so unpredictable, why it refuses until today to be
entirely settled. Europe's black possessions remained-and do remain-in Europe's colonies, at which
remove they represented no threat whatever to European identity. If they posed any problem at all for the
European conscience, it was a problem which remained comfortingly abstract: in effect, the black man, as
a man, did not exist for Europe. But in America, even as a slave, he was an inescapable part of the general
social fabric and no American could escape having an attitude toward him. Americans attempt until today
to make an abstraction of the Negro, but the very nature of these abstractions reveals the tremendous
effects the presence of the Negro has had on the American character.
When one considers the history of the Negro in America it is of the greatest importance to
recognize that the moral beliefs of a person, or a people, are never really as tenuous as life-which is not
moral-very often causes them to appear; these create for them a frame of reference and a necessary hope,
the hope being that when life has done its worst they will be enabled to rise above themselves and to
triumph over life. Life would scarcely be bearable if this hope did not exist. Again, even when the worst
has been said, to betray a belief is not by any means to have put oneself beyond its power; the betrayal of
a belief is not the same thing as ceasing to believe. If this were not so there would be no moral standards
in the world at all. Yet one must also recognize that morality is based on ideas and that all ideas are
dangerous-dangerous because ideas can only lead to action and where the action leads no man can say.
And dangerous in this respect: that confronted with the impossibility of remaining faithful to one's beliefs,
and the equal impossibility of becoming free of them, one can be driven to the most inhuman excesses.
The ideas on which American beliefs are based are not, though Americans often seem to think so, ideas
which originated in America. They came out of Europe. And the establishment of democracy on the
American continent was scarcely as radical a break with the past as was the necessity, which Americans
faced, of broadening this concept to include black men.
This was, literally, a hard necessity. It was impossible, for one thing, for Americans to abandon
their beliefs, not only because these beliefs alone seemed able to justify the sacrifices they had endured
and the blood that they had spilled, but also because these beliefs afforded them their only bulwark
against a moral chaos as absolute as the physical chaos of the continent it was their destiny to conquer.
But in the situation in which Americans found themselves, these beliefs threatened an idea which,
whether or not one likes to think so, is the very warp and woof of the heritage of the West, the idea of
white supremacy.
Americans have made themselves notorious by the shrillness and the brutality with which they
have insisted on this idea, but they did not invent it; and it has escaped the, world's notice that those very
excesses of which Americans have been guilty imply a' certain, unprecedented uneasiness over the idea' s
life and power, if not, indeed, the idea' s validity .The idea of white supremacy rests simply on the fact
that white men are the creators of civilization (the present civilization, which is the only one that matters;
all previous civilizations are simply contributions" to our own) and are therefore civilization's guardians
and defenders. Thus it was impossible for Americans to accept the black man as one of themselves, for to
do so was to jeopardize their status as white men. But not so to accept him was to deny his human reality,
his human weight and complexity, and the strain of denying the overwhelmingly undeniable forced
Americans into rationalizations so fantastic that they approached the pathological.
At the root of the American Negro problem is the necessity of the American white man to find a
way of living with the Negro in order to be able to live with himself.And the history of this problem can
be reduced to the means used by Americans-lynch law: and law, segregation and legal acceptance,
terrorization and concession-either to come; to terms with this necessity , or to find a way around it, or
(most usually) to find away of doing both these things at once. The resulting spectacle, at once foolish
and dreadful, led someone to make the quite accurate observation that "the Negro-in-America is a form of
insanity which overtakes white men."
In this long battle, a battle by no means finished, the unforeseeable effects of which will be felt by
many future generations, the white man's motive was the protection of his identity; the black man was
motivated by the need to establish an identity .And despite the terrorization which the Negro in America
endured and endures sporadically until today, despite the cruel and totally inescapable ambivalence of his
status in his country , the battle for his identity has long ago been won. He is not a visitor to the West, but
a citizen there, an American; as American as the Americans who despise him, the Americans who fear
him, the Americans who love him-the Americans who became less than themselves, or rose to be greater
than themselves by virtue of the fact that the challenge he represented was inescapable. He is perhaps the
only black man in the world whose relationship to white men is more terrible, more subtle, and more
meaningful than the relationship of bitter possessed to uncertain possessors. His survival depended,
and his development depends, on his ability to turn his peculiar status in the Western world to his own
advantage and, it may be, to the very great advantage of that world. It remains for him to fashion out of
his experience that which will give him sustenance, and a voice. The cathedral at Chartres, I have said,
says something to the people of this village which it cannot say to me; but it is important to understand
that, this cathedral says something to me which it cannot say to them. Perhaps they are struck by the
power of the spires, the glory of the windows; but they have known God, after all, longer than I have
known him, and in a different way, and I am terrified by the slippery bottomless well to be found in the
crypt, down which heretics were hurled to death, and by the obscene, inescapable gargoyles jutting out of
the stone and seeming to say that God and the devil can never be divorced. I doubt that the villagers think
of the devil when they face a cathedral because they have never been identified with the devil. But I must
accept the status which myth, if nothing else, gives me in the West before I can hope to change the myth.
Yet, if the American Negro has arrived at his identity by virtue of the absoluteness of his
estrangement from his past, American white men still nourish the illusion that there is some means of
recovering the European innocence, of returning to a state in which black men do not exist. This is one of
the greatest errors Americans can make. The identity they fought so hard to protect has, by virtue of that
battle, undergone a change: Americans are as unlike any other white people in the world as it is possible
to be. I do not think, for example, that it is too much to suggest that the American vision of the world-
which allows so little reality, generally speaking, for any of the darker forces in human life, which tends
until today to paint moral issues in glaring black and white-owes a great deal to the battle waged by
Americans to maintain between themselves and black men a human separation which could not be
bridged. It is only now beginning to be borne in on us-very faintly, it must be admitted, very slowly, and
very much against our will--that this vision of the world is dangerously inaccurate, and perfectly useless.
For it protects our moral high-mindedness at the terrible expense of weakening our grasp of reality.
People who shut their eyes to reality simply invite their own destruction, and anyone who insists on
remaining in a state of innocence long after that innocence is dead turns himself into a monster.
The time has come to realize that the interracial drama acted out on the American continent has
not only created a new black man, it has created a new white man, too. No road whatever will lead
Americans back to the simplicity of this European village where white men still have the luxury of
looking on me as a stranger. I am not, really, a stranger any longer for any American alive. One of the
things that distinguishes Americans from other people is that no other people has ever been so deeply
involved in the lives of black men, and vice versa. This fact faced, with all its implications, it can be seen
that the history of the American Negro problem is not merely shameful, it is also something of an
achievement. For even when the worst has been said, it must also be added that the perpetual challenge
posed by this problem was always, somehow, perpetually met. It is precisely this black-white experience
which may prove of indispensable value to us in the world we face today. This world is white no longer,
and it will never be white again.
